---
date: 2025-01-01
tags:
  - logic
  - algebra
title: Mathematica Nova - Introduction
description: ...
---
So, a value is, at its core, an idea one can think of, and ideas can not be directly shared.

Now, if I ask you "think of an animal," and I ask you to tell me which one you thought of, what will you do? Most likely you will use _language_ to elicit the idea you thought of to me. "Elephant."

In maths, we can do the same, by using _names_. A name can be a letter, a word or a little drawing. For the value I made on the previous chapter (yeah, that one), I'll give the name "$▽$". 

So, our first new value is $▽$.

There we go!

Alright, let us create yet another new value, to prove we _really_ understand what values are. That value shall be named... "$▲$"!

So, we have $▽$ and $▲$! How excellent!

Notice that whenever I use the name directly, I elicit the value. Whenever I use the name in quotation marks I am eliciting the _name itself_.
 
This notation allows us to refer to the name and to its underlying value unambiguously.
 
- $▽$ is a value we created today!
- "$▽$" is an unfilled upside down triangle.

The act of representing a value with a name is called "Lexical Binding." Big words, huh?

> [!TIP] Lexical (adjective)
> 1. Of or relating to the vocabulary, words, or morphemes of a language.

> [!TIP] Binding (noun)
> A uniting force or tie; a link.

Our lexical binding has three parts:

1. A name: "$▽$".
2. A value: $▽$.
3. And a scope, which is the situations where the lexical binding is relevant, and the symbol is understood to represent the value. By that I mean, someone else on Earth might use "$▽$" to represent something else, and we can not stop them! The scope of our lexical binding "$▽$" is "the entirety of this book."

It's important to stress that at this point, you should not have any difficulties — make sure you really did absorb these concepts before we move forward.

> [!TLDR]
> There are "Values", which are ideas. A value in isolation has no parts and does nothing. You can tie "Names" to Values in order to represent them for the purpose of conversation. This tie is called "Lexical Binding."